================
Vision statement
================

The basic ideas behind the :ref:`lsf` are developed below in a few steps:

Many developers feel that free software is fundamentally better than
proprietary software [#fsf1]_.  What seems obvious to these developers is
usually less clear to stakeholders and investors.  Many business models in
software industry still rely on some proprietary part for generating revenue.

Lino fundamentally differs from proprietary frameworks or open source projects
controlled by a corporation who produces proprietary documentation.

We believe that proprietary software is incompatible with a free human
civilization.  We believe that the future belongs to free software. We believe
that a software system and its community cannot be sustainable when they are
powered by a single company who controls usage rights on either source code or
documentation.

Our belief is not naive.  There is a growing list of organizations devoted to
free software [#wikipedia1]_. The free world has an operating system, an office
suite, several good frameworks for developing web and desktop applications, and
many other projects that are steadily gaining users.

But until now there is no sustainable solution for organizations who want their
own :term:`customized database application`. This market segment is still
dominated by a few proprietary giants.

We believe that the :term:`Lino framework` has the potential of becoming a
solution for this problem.

At the moment this potential is merely visible to investors and stakeholders.
There is much work to do to bring Lino to the next level.  Lino needs to grow
from a small private corporation into a reliable international organization.

:doc:`rumma` is currently the motor behind Lino. But they want to remain a
family-sized dynamic team of creative developers. Even if somebody would
convince them to become big and bring Lino to the next level, this wouldn't be
a solution. Sooner or later they would turn Lino into something which is no
longer really free. A private corporation with limited responsibility is not a
valid candidate for this job. The role of bringing Lino to the next level must
be played by an organization that does not have any private interest.

That's why Lino needs a foundation like the `PSF
<https://www.python.org/psf/>`__ the `DSF
<https://www.djangoproject.com/foundation/>`__ or the `WMF
<https://wikimediafoundation.org/>`__, or a similar legal person.

The objective of the :doc:`lsf` is to act as the promotor and operator of the
:term:`Lino framework` in a sustainable way and based on above ideas.

See also :doc:`bm`.


.. glossary::

    Lino community

        The group of :term:`actors <actor>` who use the :term:`Lino framework`
        as a :term:`software product` and adhere to our community guide.

        The :term:`Lino framework` is free software and you may use it without
        adhering to our community guide. In that case you simply aren't a
        member of our community.

        The legal entity representing the :term:`Lino community` is
        :doc:`rumma` as long as there is no :doc:`lsf`.

    Actor

        A physical or legal person who assumes one or several roles within our
        community.




.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#fsf1] See `Why Open Source misses the point of Free Software
   <https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/open-source-misses-the-point.html>`__


.. [#wikipedia1] See `List of free and open-source software organizations
   <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_free_and_open-source_software_organizations>`__